alright now let's leave the atomists and
go on to the second school for this
evening the Sophists now this office
strictly speaking were not so much as
school as a professional class in the
fifth century BC Sophia as you know
means wisdom so Sophists if you go by
the etymology as a wise man and Noah
however what they knew and what they
taught if we put it briefly was how to
win friends and flatter the multitude
and thereby gain political power in your
particular city they appealed above all
to unscrupulous office seekers and they
taught them all the debating tricks all
the fallacies all the confusing gimmicks
that they could think of so that the
aspiring politician could bamboozle his
opponent they were in effect like
debased Dale Carnegie's on the political
level the result was that they acquired
a bad name and the word softest has come
to have its president negative
connotations I might say partly the name
the negative connotations are undeserved
because they were held in opprobrium
because they accepted money from
teaching philosophy which was regarded
as a breach of moral principle and
apparently still is by many universities
the main Sophists were Pro Tiger aspire
Oh ta geo Ras he's the father of sophism
480 to 410 BC and gorgeous
Geor gie a.s who is 483 to 375 BC you
may have heard of others such as
Thrasymachus and Cal achlys but the big
two are pro Tigers and gorgeous
now philosophically the Sophists are the
first avowed skeptics in history if we
ignore cratylus who never would say
anything
and I've given you the definition of
skepticism no objective or certain
knowledge as possible to anyone about
anything nothing can be known well how
you ask do they know this what arguments
do they put forth primarily they based
their skepticism on an all-out attack on
the senses now when I say all-out I mean
all of it they claim to prove that every
sense perception by any creature is
necessarily invalid now this is a much
more sweeping argument than the Reader's
Digest type I mean by that then the
obviously popular type for instance
there is the argument from illusion you
know you put a stick in water it appears
banded it's really straight and there's
a certain mentality that derives from
that the conclusion that therefore the
senses are unreliable or there's the
argument from hallucinations you know
you see a dagger before you or pink rats
after having a drink and they aren't
really there and there's a certain
mentality that concludes from that that
the sentencer unreliable now those
arguments are very poor arguments they
wouldn't stop anybody seriously for five
minutes the Sophists were not above
using those arguments but that was not
the essence of their case their case was
a much more important argument it was an
all-out attempt to show that every sense
perception is wrong not just that we can
be taken in by an occasional illusion or
hallucination but that you can never
trust anything from the senses why well
here is the famous argument
whenever we perceive what we perceive
depends upon two factors one it depends
upon the object being perceived now that
much is obvious if I look at a person
that's one object and I'm going to have
a different experience than if I look at
a picture of water and so on if I listen
to rock my love I'm going to have a
different experience than if I listen to
Beethoven I'm hearing a different object
that much is obvious but the crucial
point is point to what you perceive they
say depends not only on the object but
also on the nature of your sensory
apparatus the nature and condition of
your sensory apparatus I hear there are
many famous examples that color blind
men and demand with normal vision look
at the same rug and one says it's red
the other says no it's great
they're looking at the same object but
their experience is influenced by the
type of sensory apparatus they have you
taste a piece of cherry pie but it
tastes sweet you then develop a cold or
smoke for packages of cigarettes and
coat your tongue appropriately and taste
it and it tastes bitter same object you
look at the Sun from the earth and it
seems to be about the size of a 50-cent
piece you travel closer and closer to it
and it gets you during a huge earth the
size that you experience varies with the
condition in this case your distance of
your perception you take three beakers
of water the freezing cold one the
medium warm one and the boiling hot one
and you have one person plunges hand in
the ice cold one and then in the
lukewarm one and he says oh how warm and
you have another person plunge his hand
in the boiling water and then into the
same medium one and he says oh how cold
same object different experience this
office say because the sensory apparatus
is different now you can do this with
anyone if you want with any sensory
quality if you want an example put your
finger gently I stress gently into your
eye and press it and you will see two of
me
now the Sophists say to elaborate beyond
what they said but the idea was we can't
go by majority rule in this question
what if there was a race of Martians and
they had their fingers there's tied into
their eyes at birth so they saw two of
everything now would you say the way to
tell whether there's really one or
really two is to take a population count
and if there's more marshall's than us
there's two if there's more of us than
the Martians there's one obviously that
would be senseless you can't go by
majority rule in epistemology what
conclusion then do we come to who is
right well they said there's only one
fair conclusion to come to nobody is
right because nobody can ever perceive
reality except as processed by his
particular sensory apparatus
nobody ever perceives reality directly
you can't just take your consciousness
and wrap it around something impulses
have to be given off which go through
your particular operators and the kind
of apparatus you have affects what you
at the other end finally experience
therefore all we ever can know is the
way reality appears to us because of our
senses and if we our sense is different
the appearance is different therefore we
can never say no one can ever say what
is the case objectively in reality all
you can ever know about is what appears
to you and now because tomorrow your
senses may change put it another way you
never can say it is you always must
begin your sentences with it seems to me
it appears to me there's no way of
knowing how things really are
all we know are our own subjective
experiences the private effects on each
of us of the world out there and since
these effects vary from individual
individual from species to species from
time to time
each of us lives in his own private
subjective world and we simply have to
dispense with all talk about reality now
some of them went so far as to say we
may as well get rid of the whole idea of
reality how do you know there even is
such a thing since you never perceive it
others weren't quite so radical and they
said well there is one but what's the
differences it's unknowable anyway now
this is the most influential argument
ever advanced against the validity of
the census it's the only influential
argument ever advanced against the
validity of the census it was accepted
in full by Plato
although rejected by Aristotle accepted
by Plato and then of course Pike or the
whole Christian era by almost all modern
philosophers without exception and in a
blown up cosmic a gigantic form it's the
basis of Kant's whole philosophy so
therefore it is urgently important that
you know what is wrong with this
argument now please observe that two
things are true and can't be contested
it is true that perception is impossible
without sensory organs and it is true
that the type of organs you have in some
way affect the type of experience you
have that much is true now from those
premises Protagoras draws the conclusion
you can never perceive reality now I ask
you what is wrong with his reason now I
suggest you think about it add it to
your list
all right where did this office go from
here having annihilated in their view at
least the census well you might say what
about reason couldn't reason give us
knowledge of reality even if the senses
deceive us well of course the earlier
rationalist would have taken exactly
that position and Plato subsequently
will take that position but the Sophists
do not they hold the view that reason
depends upon the evidence of the senses
which is quite correct you're entirely
correct on this point and they say
therefore if the senses give each of us
only our own private subjective world
then our so-called rational conclusions
are each of them true only for that
private individual only for his private
world are true only for him now the arch
mark of a saw fost in today's world is
anybody who puts the word for after the
word true there's two kinds of people
the people who say this is true and
people who say this is true for me for
you for him for her for it for us for
etc as soon as the anybody puts four on
that is the tip-off that he has a
subjectivist that he does not believe
you can make a statement about reality
that everybody has his own private
little world and in your little world
there might be a god and therefore it's
true for you but in my little world
there isn't and therefore it's not true
for me and so on now that goes back to
the Sophos viewpoint now most people
that they can't even defend that
viewpoint this office at least derived
it from an overall epistemology nor was
that the only thing they held against
reason namely the deficiency of the
sensory basis of it they also put forth
the argument which we can call the
argument from disagreement the argument
from disagreement is very simple
everybody disagrees about what is
rational who is to say what's really
true Bailey says everything is water
Heraclitus has no it's fire change
Parmenides says oh there is no change at
all pythagoras says you're all crazy
it's a world of numbers and the atom is
they all know it's little particles and
the Sophos at this point come in and
they say now look this is hopeless
if human beings had a way of arriving at
the truth they would agree if they don't
agree it must just simply go to show
that reason is incapable of arriving of
the truth that argument by the way is
enormous ly widespread almost as
widespread as it is fallacious if you
have any questions about it I'll be glad
to answer them in the question there but
I take for granted the obvious fallacy
and there's still a third thing they had
against reason namely they were
followers of Heraclitus so everything is
constantly changing nothing therefore is
an absolute so even if by some miracle
of good luck you hit on the truth anyone
stayed true for two seconds anyway you
see nothing is true for two consecutive
instants so you can't even say simply it
seems you have to say it seems to me now
now a to famous statements expressing
this view one is protagonist as famous
statement the manifesto of subjectivism
man is the measure of all things of
things that are that they are and of
things that are not that they are not
now by man there he means each
individual man subjectively in other
words if you believe if you feel that
something is so it is so for you now and
if you don't it isn't for you now and so
on that's the famous man is the measure
of all things and therefore of course is
complete subjectivism
and complete relativism there's no
absolutes there's no objective truth and
the even more succinct formulation comes
from gorgeous who was the perfect
example of a 20th century skeptic
transplanted into ancient Greece he
wrote a book where they were all writing
books on nature on reality on the nature
of reality as his book in the true
Sophos tradition was titled on nature
subtitle or the non-existent
and it maintained three basic
propositions one nothing exists - if
anything existed you couldn't know it
three if you could know what you
couldn't communicate now that is what
you call skepticism now it is useless to
ask him does he exist does he know the
things that he claims has he
communicated there's no use asking him
that because he'll say no yes say it's
highly probable of nothing exists and if
you ask him well do you know that you'll
say it's highly probable that it's
highly probable that nothing exists and
so on and so on that's what they used to
call me agent world reduction to
babbling the skeptic would finally stand
in the corner and simply say it's highly
probable it's highly probable it's a
problem so needless to say as is true of
all skeptics without exception the
Sophists prided themselves on being
enlightened on having escaped the
superstition and the dogmas of the past
they said we proudly know that you can't
know anything we don't pretend to have
any knowledge now this is a historical
cycle you will see and we're therefore
at the end of an era you will see that
the whole history of philosophy is in
cycles like this a constructive era
collapsing into total skepticism and in
the beginning of a new one into a still
deeper skepticism in comparison to which
even gorgeous seems to be a cognitive
specialist and so on and so on that this
has been repeated over and over again is
a fascinating parallel to the history of
certain countries which have a mixed
economy that is there'll be a
constructive period a boom and then a
bust a depression and then another
constructive period frequently with
inflated speculation following upon
which there is a more severe depression
and that has been the entire pattern of
the history of philosophy and whenever
you reach complete skeptic
you finish cycle 1 and since people
can't live by it that is the time when a
new philosopher of great importance
always appears because he is the one who
tells mankind what to do now now I
simply say that in the 20th century
skepticism reached and has now reached
the most intense level ever
which augers well for the future of a
new constructive period now let us turn
in conclusion to the ethics or morality
of this office because they had very
definite views on this question
well can efex come from reason obviously
not reason is deficient can it come from
God obviously not now remember this
office says good skeptics are not
atheists atheists claim to know
something for certain namely that
there's a no God the skeptics are
agnostics this office are agnostics they
don't know one way or the other whether
there's ago but in any event they don't
know that he does exist so he's no good
for ethics
well the question is where is ethics
come from them can't come from reality
it can't come from God and their answer
is very simple
it doesn't it comes from nowhere there
is no objective ethics there is no basis
for it no source of it and man has no
cognitive faculty to grasp it therefore
they are as you would expect complete
ethical subjectivist and complete
ethical or relativists man is the
measure of all things including of all
things that are good you say to them but
don't you recognize certain virtues that
man should involve answer virtue is an
arbitrary social convention their
position is if you feel that something
is good and by something I mean anything
whether it's having an ice-cream cone or
massacring a continent if you feel that
it's good or right it is good for you
know all desires are ethically equal
because there's nothing to go by except
arbitrary desires and passions if they
were starting out their ethics
systematically the first proposition
would be I want it whatever it happens
to be and if you say to them well what
about facts or reality of course the
answer will be who knows anything about
facts our reality if you say shouldn't
your desires be rational the answer
would be what's rational for you isn't
rational for me man is Domitian and so
we have an ethics of putting it an
Objectivist terminology of avowed or
whim worshiping and according to the
later Sophos particularly the more
intense your whims your arbitrary
desires the better the ideal life they
said is first you should burn with
passionate arbitrary desire of any kind
at all and then go out and satisfy it by
any means at all all desires and all
means of satisfying them are equally
valid live by your desires they said
that's what is the natural element in
you that's what's giving you by nature
by realities all the talk and argument
and reasoning and philosophy and so on
that is simply artificial that is
conventional that simply society's
arbitrary dictates and so they are
profoundly anti intellectual as they
would have to be considering the
intellect to be completely impotent and
they believe that their way to achieve
morality as they construe it is simply
express your passions and view which has
been adopted intact by many schools of
contemporary psychotherapy exactly this
same view only instead of saying this is
the way to be moral they say this is the
way to be uninhibited and healthy now
the later Sophists added in another
point to this view because the question
came up well what happens if your
desires conflict with somebody else's
desires and you have to deal with other
human beings what do you do then and the
answer was smash him with a club before
he smashes you
in other words there's only one method
of dealing with other men and that is
brute physical force if the useless to
try to argue with men or convince them
by reason for obvious reasons the reason
is helpless
the only argument is a club there's a
particularly throw Symmachus in
particular is famous for this view it's
the first time we've had in philosophy
the view that might makes right now they
said there's only one trouble with what
people call immorality like lying
cheating robbing raping murdering
ascension the only trouble is you get
caught
what suppose they said you could put on
a veneer of virtue you know you could
join some appropriate charitable
organizations and some clubs and so on
so it looked like you were a good law
abiding citizen and you make appropriate
sacrifices that religious temples and
therefore you bribe the gods suppose you
could put on this outer covering of ice
they said and at the same time live a
subterranean life out recovering a
virtue and at the same time live a
subterranean life of roaring vice well
they said that would be terrific you
would then have the best of both worlds
the rewards of virtue the social
approval and the pleasures of Vice or if
you can't do that they said what about
trying to become a dictator get a big
police and military on your side and
then you don't have to worry about any
retaliation and they went on this is not
simply our theory all men are like this
this is human nature why then do most
men say you shouldn't live this way why
does society say you shouldn't cheat and
rob and kill and rape and their answer
was society is a hypocrite society is a
coward the people at makeup society
secretly lust after just this kind of
life but they're afraid they figure if
they do this and then start the law the
rule slaughter other people to get what
you want somebody's going to do it to
them and beat them to the punch and
therefore they get together and they
let's compromise I'll give up what would
be the ideal life of killing you if you
give up what would be the ideal life of
killing me and so we'll follow these
rules but they said in society does this
strictly out of fear cowardice and
hypocrisy therefore not out of
conviction every man would run riot like
a women worshipping Sophists if he
thought he could get away with it the
famous story illustrating this is told
by Plato who of course profoundly
opposes the Sophists it's the story of
the Ring of God geez Gy GES a mythical
character but simply you said like a
parable to illustrate a point guy just
was a shepherd who had a discovered a
ring and this ring had the magical power
that when you turned the stone to the
ground you became invisible so it was
like an anticipation of HG Wells
invisible man and the Sophists say if
you had the magic ring of guy geez life
would be magnificent you could then run
riot you could do anything you wanted
satisfy all desires and you would be in
a perfect state and they say everyone is
like that that's the way people are and
the only question is do you have the
courage ineffective approximate this
condition or are you gonna be a coward
now if I could just read you for a
moment from Plato's presentation of this
view his dialogues of course represent
different views that he tries to answer
but this is a famous description by
through Symmachus speaking in Plato's
dialogue of the myth of God Jesus the
Ring of God jeez I'll just read you an
excerpt from it suppose there were two
such magic rings and one were given to
the just man the other to the unjust no
one it is commonly believed would have
such iron strength of mind as to stand
fast and doing right or keep his hands
off other man's Goods when he could go
to the marketplace and fearlessly help
himself to anything he wanted in her
houses and sleep with any woman he chose
said prisoners free and kill men at his
pleasure and in a word go about among
men with the powers of a god the so
called just man would behave no better
than the other
both would take the same
surely this is strong proof that men do
right only under compulsion no
individual thinks of it as good for him
personally since he does wrong whenever
he thinks he has the power granted full
license to do as he liked people would
think a man a miserable fool if he
refused to wrong his neighbors or to
touch their belongings though in public
they keep up a pretence of praising his
conduct for fear of being wrong
themselves so much for that and then
they go on to say that you have to
become a real skilled expert in
injustice however so that you can get
away with it now
this viewpoint is given a philosophic
name and it is called egoism it is
called egoism because the Sophos
certainly do not preach that you should
sacrifice for God or for others and they
say you should achieve your own
advantage and that should be your only
goal now you see it is egoism I mean
you'd have to classify it as that as
against altruism or sacrifice for God or
some other type of theory but it is
egoism which is thoroughly relativist
skeptical and subjectivist and one of
the worst errors one of the worst
tragedies of Western philosophy is that
egoism at its inception was tied to
these other views the result is that
ever since egoism has been associated
with two cardinal points one way the win
worshiping with the idea that the egoist
is the man who arbitrarily follows his
subjective passions wherever they lead
you and to brutality the idea that an
ego it to someone who tramples over
others and you see arbitrary whim
worship and brutality are all that's
left when you abandon reason and since
the Sophists were egoist who abandoned
reason they gave the first to give
egoism the image and the concept that it
has to this day in many people's minds
now there were exceptions Aristotle is
an egoist of a radically different kind
but it was to the interest of the
centuries of Christianity to ignore the
existence
of Aristotle and to present sophism as
the only concept of egoism and so of
course in the mass media today if
someone is referred to as selfish that
is simply taken as a synonym that he is
a brute whim worshipper but I believe
that to this audience knows comment on
that is necessary now this is the sort
of position that Plato is going to try
to answer and tell us what is wrong
above all he was concerned to answer the
Sophists
in the history of philosophy there have
been both the empiricist and the
rationalist sides to the reason senses
dichotomy I didn't use the word
empiricist but that's the side that
would say we start with the senses and
then it turns out that they subsequently
say reason is no good and we have just
the senses why did the Greeks take the
rationalist side instead of the senses
are valid or good and the reason is not
side and that's an excellent question
and my answer to that would be of course
these two views as presented here are
false both false the view that reason is
right and the senses are wrong or that
the senses are right and the reason is
useless are both false but it is
significant that the Greeks took the
rationalist side rather than the
empiricist side in the sense that's
being used in this question and I would
say the answer is because the Greeks
were thinkers in the following way if
you're going to be wrong and I don't
mean to say that some errors are wrong
or less wrong and than others but if
you're going to be wrong it is a much
superior to be a rationalist in a
certain limited respect because if you
take the other side and say the senses
are valid but you can't trust the mind
like David Hume did for instance you are
then in the position of an animal or a
skeptic you are in the position of
saying nobody can know anything and
under that viewpoint knowledge
immediately comes to a halt you simply
can't know anything because a human
being who denies the validity of Reason
wipes out the possibility of
intellectual development so ideally
mankind would have started with the
proper relationship of the two faculties
but if they had to start wrong it's
perfectly understandable that they would
start by accepting the validity of
thought and then if they were led to
primitive conclusions which seem to defy
the evidence they clung to their reason
as they understood it and wrote off the
sensory evidence that of course is
profoundly wrong but if you're going to
make a mistake and continue to think you
cannot abandon thought in this sense the
rationalists have always been
philosophically superior to the skeptics
although of course objective is and
repudiates both and they have always
been influential on men
the skeptics simply set up the next
rationalist that's all the Sophists give
time for Plato to come in and the later
skeptics give the door open to Augustine
and the Renaissance skeptics opened the
door to Descartes and David Hume opened
the door to Kant etc the whole pattern
has been that the skeptic simply wipe
out everything and the next rationalist
comes in to institute his own new form
of mysticism but in that respect it is
the of these two errors it is the
rationalists that are the only ones that
have even thought and that have
influenced mankind for good or evil the
skeptics disqualify themselves on the
face of it
if the Sophists believed that one can't
know anything how do they know what a
desire is a perfectly good question to
which I can only say the Sophists were
inconsistent they were not properly
skeptical their modern followers are
much more consistent and they say what
can't talk about desires because you
have the faintest idea what a desire is
nor can you ever know what your desires
are how can you be sure of anything
Kant says for instance your desires as
they really are entirely unknowable to
you all you can know is your desires as
they appear to you so-called phenomenal
desires not the luminal desires and he
has modern disciples who go one step
further and they say how do you even
know the way your desires appear to you
how do you know they don't appear to you
differently from the way they really
appear to you and therefore you can know
anything I mean from this point if you
gorgeous as I say was a half-hearted
Fairweather skeptic compared to the 20th
century